FRED LOGUE SUBMISSION — VERBATIM TRANSCRIPTION
Planning application Ref 2560781 (25-60781)
Old Mill Hotel Site, Duleek Road R150 / Main Street R132, Julianstown
Applicant: Casana Developments Limited
Submission received by MCC: 13 July 2026
Submitted by: Fred Logue, 7 Riverside Cottages, Julianstown, Co Meath, A92W6P4
Note on cover: "Please see attached - the previous submission used the wrong file in error"
Observations on the Further Information submitted 25 May 2026. Deadline for observations 14 July 2026. No fee due as observer already made observations; certificate in Annex 1.

SOURCE: Screenshots IMG_2063 to IMG_2067 (pages 1–4 of letter + cover). Document is 13 pages total. Pages 5–13 PENDING.

=== DEVELOPMENT DESCRIPTION (as recited by Logue) ===
Mixed-use development comprising residential, retail, pharmacy, cafe, medical and community uses. Riverside park proposed as part of development. Total of 62 dwellings proposed in a mix of terraced houses, apartments and duplex units ranging in size from 1–3 bedrooms. Development involves conservation and re-use of the two no. derelict protected structures on site. Proposed to adapt and restore each of the structures on site. The 'Mill House' (RPS Ref. No. 91059) to be repurposed to accommodate a new medical centre. This will involve demolition and removal of non-original fabric, including demolition of a single storey garage to the west as well as removal of limited sections of internal walls and the conservation and repair of surviving historic fabric.

=== INTRODUCTORY OBSERVATIONS ===
1. The Old Mill was destroyed by fire in 2008 and has remained derelict since. The Mill House became derelict through vandalism and lack of maintenance by the owners. Apart from entering these buildings on the derelict sites register neither the owners nor the local authority has made any real effort to prevent the deterioration of the protected structures on the site. The entry on the Derelict Sites register was only achieved following local complaints and threats of litigation.
2. The response of the applicant makes the case for development contrary to the development plan because the site is derelict and supposedly "unviable", no information about viability is provided. This overlooks the fact that the site remains owned by the same individuals who owned the Old Mill in 2008 when it burnt down. In the meantime, the owners have failed to prevent endangerment of the protected structure and allowed it to become increasingly derelict.
3. The Planning Authority should not fall into the trap of thinking any development is better than no development. The Planning Authority has ample powers under the Derelict Sites Act and the Planning and Development Act, including CPO powers, to address the dereliction of the site and the endangerment of the protected structure.
4. The Old Mill has been a viable hotel since at least the 1970s up until its destruction by fire. There is no reason given why, like any other commercial business, the owners could not have rebuilt the hotel at the time given that it would have been insured. The claims of unviability are self-serving. What the applicant is really saying is that it wants to make a certain profit off the site and this is what is needed to achieve that profit. This is not a basis to contravene the development plan. The owner of a protected structure shouldn't profit from their own default on the duty to protect a structure.
5. If the site is genuinely unviable its CPO value will be very low and the Planning Authority can pick up the site for a very low amount.
6. The proposal has been modified slightly at FI Stage but still proposes to retain parts of the Old Mill and incorporate the retained parts into a mixed-use development containing 56 houses/apartments with 6,151 sqm gross floor area and 1,324.2 sqm of other uses (retail community etc)[fn1]. The overall gross floor area is 8,279 sqm. The total site area is 21,551 sqm of which 9,905 sqm is zoned B1, the remainder is zoned H1 and RA (outside the settlement boundary).
7. There is little doubt that the neglect of the Old Mill site by its current owners and lack of enforcement has caused long standing harm to the village of Julianstown. What was once a thriving hotel, bar and restaurant has become a blot on the landscape for Julianstown over the last 18 years.
8. In my view the FI response changes very little and does not address the very serious planning and environmental issues identified in my observations.
[fn1: There are conflicting and contradictory estimates of the non-residential GFA given.]

=== JULIANSTOWN BYPASS ===
9. The FI response says there is doubt over whether the Julianstown Traffic Relief Scheme will recommend a bypass and even if it does that it would proceed to the west. This response has now been superseded by recent progress on the scheme.
10. As correctly predicted in my first observation, the project has indeed recommended a western bypass of the village and has moved to the route selection stage. It would indeed be premature to grant planning permission outside the village boundary while the route for the proposed bypass remains uncertain.
11. A bypass of the village must take priority over this proposal.

=== ZONING ===
12. The proposal is remarkable in that it materially contravenes all three zonings on the site.
13. With H1 it proposes residential and commercial zoning which is neither permitted in principle nor open for consideration. In fact, it appears from drawing 23066-OPP-ZZ-ZZ-DR-A-9208-A1-P02 that 50% of the H1 land, zoned for High Amenity, will be developed as a road and car parking which is classified in this instance as mixed use development consisting of commercial and residential uses.[fn2] This is a material contravention of the H1 zoning.
[fn2: There are various estimates for the quantum of H1 land zoned for development in the application documents although there is a material contravention over the entire range.]
14. With B1 my submission was correct that the development plan only allows a maximum of 30% residential use in this location. The applicant in the FI submission incorrectly refers to the development plan as it was adopted but overlooks the variation which made special provision for a higher proportion of residential use on B1 lands only in higher tier settlements with up to 50% allowed and the possibility of an exceptional higher level, based on an asset analysis as set out in §9.3 and Appendix B of the EMRA RSES. In addition, B1 requires information to show how the development "will be assessed against the relevant policies and objectives in the Retail Strategy in Appendix 4, retail policy in Chapter 4 of this Plan, the DECLG 'Guidelines for Planning Authorities Retail Planning' (2012) and Section 6 of Chapter 11", which is a requirement for B1 areas. Even with the reduced number of units the proposal is still predominantly residential with a percentage that is more than 2.5 times the maximum permitted. There is no information provided to assess the proposed retail. There is therefore a material contravention of the B1 zoning.
15. With RA there is residential/commercial development on unzoned lands. This comprises an access roadway and an excavated flood storage area. The FI response is wrong to claim there are no structures proposed on RA land. The roadway and excavated flood retention area are both structures, as defined in section 2 of the Planning and Development Act 2000. This is therefore a material contravention of the development plan in relation to RA zoning.

=== DENSITY ===
16. The density is incorrectly calculated by taking into account the H1 and RA zoned area which are not available for residential development. The concept of residential density applies only to land that is zoned for residential use, and in this case applies a pro-rata density for mixed-use zoning. The reason for this is that the core strategy calculates projected housing delivery and population growth in settlements exclusively on land that is zoned for residential use. It goes against the entire thrust of the NPF, RSES, core strategy, the purpose of zoning and so on to include land that cannot be developed as residential in calculations of residential density. This is also apparent from the policies in relation to open space which do not include land that is not zoned for residential use.
17. The way density is approached in Appendix B of the Compact Settlements Guidelines is to move from Gross Density at the plan level to Net Density at the project level. Gross density obviously only includes land that is zoned for residential use, this is how the core strategy translates the area of zoned land into the number of houses in the core strategy. It would make no sense to include other areas in this calculation since this would introduce arbitrary elements into the calculation. It is also obvious that the calculation of net density involves a refinement of the gross density calculation by excluding certain areas within the overall envelope used to calculate gross density, in other words net density is also calculated by reference to land that is zoned for residential use. This is done by only including those areas within the overall residential zoned land that will be developed for housing and directly associated uses.
18. RA and H1 land cannot be developed for residential use, and were not included in the core strategy calculation, and therefore cannot count towards the density calculation, it is land that must be eliminated from the calculation of both gross and net area.
19. If non-zoned land could be included for the purpose of density then a developer could simply incorporate an arbitrary amount of such land and dilute the density to whatever level they wanted.
20. Based on a correct calculation the density is at least 76 units per hectare as follows:
   [TABLE]
   Site area (B1 only): 0.98 ha
   Residential GFA Proportion: 76%
   No Units: 56
   Site area for density purposes: 0.74 ha
   Density: 76 units per ha
21. This density is more than 2 times greater than the maximum density allowed at this location under the development plan and national guidelines. In fact it is not clear which parts of the B1 zoned land must be removed since much of this land is in Flood Zone A and B, in reality the density may be much higher if these areas are excluded, however a detailed schedule of net areas within the B1 envelope has not been provided.

=== PUBLIC OPEN SPACE ===
22. The general rule in the development plan is that public open space must, at a minimum, be 15% of the site area. It appears that the applicant now accepts that public open space refers to the B1 zoned land only, although drawings are still labelling areas of the H1 zoned land as public open space.
23. The proposal, with 11% public open space, contains significantly less public open space than is required at a minimum by the development plan. The FI response fails to acknowledge this and seems to be based on an interpretation that the Compact Settlements Guidelines take precedence over the development plan, which is incorrect.
24. While the development plan provides for exceptions to the 15% minimum this can only be justified where it is clearly demonstrated through the submission of a Social Infrastructure Assessment that existing and proposed public open space provision in the area meets the needs of the potential population increase associated with the development. While the Planning Authority invited such assessment, the assessment submitted contains no analysis of existing and proposed public open space and whether it meets the needs of the potential population increase associated with the proposed development.
25. The proposed development involves a population increase of around 30% in the village but in fact propose to develop 50% of the H1 of the amenity area on the site for residential/commercial use thereby reducing the available open space in the village. In addition it appears that part of the Community Garden to the north of the village will be needed for the proposed Julianstown bypass thereby further reducing the amount of public open space in the village.
26. In the circumstances, the proposal materially contravenes the development plan in relation to public open space.

=== FLOOD RISK ===
27. It is very difficult to figure out what the flood risk assessment is saying. It appears that the proposal is to provide like for like flood storage upstream to compensate for flood plain removed by the proposed development. It is also not clear what it intended with the levels within the site and there is a suggestion that levels may need to be raised to accommodate roadway and parking, this will in fact cause increased channelisation of the river.
28. It appears that the flood risk therefore remains largely unchanged within the site and therefore the proposal continues to provide highly vulnerable development in Flood Zone A which is contrary to guidelines.
29. The flood risk assessment doesn't deploy the methodology of the Flooding Guidelines to first consider avoidance and where this is not possible consider substituting a land use that is less vulnerable to flooding. It is only when these options are exhausted does the justification test apply.
30. The justification test is also not passed since the development extends into lands that are not zoned for development, i.e. RA and H1 lands and the development on B1 zoned lands contravenes the development plan. Therefore the justification test fails at the first step.

=== MISLEADING AND CONTRADICTORY DATA ===
31. There is misleading and contradictory data which makes the calculations of density and public open space unreliable. Drawing 23066-OPP-ZZ-ZZ-DR-A-9208-A1-P02 states that the gross site area is 2.15ha, however in the FI response and on other drawings gross site area is stated to be 2.327 ha. It is this larger area that is used to calculate density, thereby overestimating the density.
32. The area schedule drawing (23066-OPP-ZZ-ZZ-DR-A-9250-A1-P02) indicates total GFA of 8,183.6 sqm with 6,151 sqm residential and 2,032.1 sqm of other uses. The latter includes 393.6 sqm of car parking and 75.7 sqm of unusable space in the Miller's house, leaving 1,562.8 sqm of non-residential use GFA. The total GFA (as defined in the Planning and Development Regulations) is therefore 7,714 sqm.
33. However the density calculation in the FI response is based on residential GFA of 6,151 sqm and non-residential of 1,866 sqm giving a total of 8,017 sqm and not the 7,790 sqm reported in Table 2. The reported total GFA of 7,790 also appears to include unusable space in the Miller's house and therefore is based on an incorrect calculation of non-residential GFA. When the numbers from the above drawing are used the residential GFA as a proportion of the development becomes 6,151/(1,562.8+6,151) = 80% and not the 76% reported.
34. The Social Impact Assessment (§3.0) further identifies a different figure of 1,649 sqm of non-residential use.
35. The same assessment identifies a 0.9ha riverside park incorporating children's play area. This appears to be located entirely within the H1 area. However the drawings show that half of this area is proposed to be developed as a roadway and parking. Further on in this report, the area is reported to be 0.5289 sqm, the size of an A1 sheet of paper.
36. In the FI response it says that the "encroachment" onto H1 zoned lands is "extremely limited" and is 2,550 sqm, a different figure again. I would observe there that 30% is not "extremely limited" by any measure.
37. The various areas identified in the various planning documents are completely inconsistent. The upshot of this is that the application is invalid for failure to provide accurate plans and particulars.

=== SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE ASSESSMENT ===
38. The elephant in the room in the Social Infrastructure Assessment is the existing and historical use of the site as a hotel, bar, restaurant and nightclub. There is no assessment at all of this category of social infrastructure.
39. In fact there is a major deficit in the area in this regard. The hotel in Bettystown has been derelict for a long time and Drogheda, a town with a population of >50,000, has only a small hotel with the D hotel closing in the last couple of years and Rossnaree some years earlier again when it was developed as a nursing home.
40. The nearby Glenside hotel has been operating continuously since the 1960s and as a hotel since the 1980s and therefore is part of the historical context. The Lime Kiln has recently changed hands and the function room has now been reconfigured as part of the restaurant reducing further public infrastructure.

=== EIA ===
41. As correctly pointed out in my observation the proposal has not been accompanied by the information required for EIA screening. There is a bald statement on the planning report that:
   "Having regard to the nature, scale and location of the developments on zoned and serviced lands its location removed from any sensitive location, it is considered there is no real likelihood of significant effects on the environment arising and as such the need for a screening determination can be ruled out."
42. This statement is clearly wrong. Furthermore the FI response simply refers to the size of the proposed development and not to the nature and location. A project cannot be screened based only on its size without regard to its nature and location.
43. For a start the applicant's own analysis identifies likely significant effects on Natura 2000 sites and it has submitted an NIS. For this reason alone EIA is required.
44. Second there is development on unzoned land including H1 amenity land and RA rural area land. In other words the proposal does not accord with the land use identified in the development plan which was subject to SEA.
45. Third the location is not removed from any sensitive location. The site is subject to regular severe flooding and proposes residential development in flood zone A. It is in an architectural conservation area and contains significant protected structures that have been allowed to fall into dereliction. There are numerous protected structures throughout the village, including the bridge which forms the eastern boundary of the site.
46. Fourth the area is located in a sensitive landscape area where the LCA indicates that large housing developments are not appropriate having regard to landscape protection.
47. Fifth, a large proportion of the site is in a very noisy area due to the busy road with Lden >55 dB and Lnight > 45dB. The Planning Authority is invited to apply the Meath Noise Action Plan, which aims to avoid residential and other sensitive developments in very noisy areas. This would also be consistent with NPO65 of the NPF.
48. Sixth the R150/R132 junction is saturated and has serious queuing for extended periods. The introduction of >100 more cars into the village will make a very bad situation immeasurably worse as evidenced by the applicants own traffic assessment.
49. There is therefore real doubt over likely significant effects on the environment and EIA screening information should be submitted.

=== LVIA ===
50. The LVIA does not give an objective or representative impression of the visual impact on Julianstown. It has deliberately use viewpoints where the site is obscured by trees and has introduced strategically placed non-existent large trees onto the visualisations of the site to obscure further the impact.
51. The images from viewpoint 7 illustrates this very well. The viewpoint is directly behind a stand or trees so that the buildings aren't visible from this location, however there is an unobstructed view of the site from a location a couple of meters further to the north. See below
   [PHOTO: "Photograph taken at VP7 on 12 July 2026." — road with tree stand obscuring site]
52. As can be seen at this location the bulk of the site is not visible because it is obscured by trees. It is also clear that the large trees shown as dark green trees on the CGI are not present.
   [PHOTO: "Photo taken from slightly north of VP7 on 12 July 2026" — buildings/site visible over wall]
53. There is, on the other hand, a completely unobstructed view of the site from a viewpoint not more than 5-10m north of VP7. CGIs from this location would give a far more representative impression of the visual impact from the proposed development (see above).
54. The only view from further away is VP4 but again an area where the site is not visible to the north of the site. There is no similar view from the south, presumably because the site is prominent and visible from this location.
55. The LVIA is therefore not objective or representative of the visual or landscape impact and seems to have been designed to obscure the impact rather than represent it and assess it.

=== IRREGULARITIES / PREJUDGMENT BIAS ===
56. The FI response says that there was correspondence between the applicant's agent and the planning authority. None of this correspondence is on the planning file. It further says there was a telephone call, again no record of this call is on the file. There is no legal basis for an applicant to engage privately with a planning authority concerning a pending application. The only facility for this form of engagement is pre-application consultation which takes place before an application is submitted and where there is a mandatory record-keeping requirement with the records to be placed on the planning file.
57. This is not a trivial concern since it appears that the Planning Authority accepted as part of this engagement an erroneous methodology for calculating density and in essence agreed with it. This was done in private and without taking into account public observations or the FI response pointing out these errors.
58. Furthermore the FI response indicates "agreement" with MCC in relation to the location of car parking and footpath widening.
59. There is no basis for a planning authority to agree elements of a pending planning application which has not yet been granted. By agreeing details during the process, the Planning Authority gives the impression that it has already decided to grant planning permission without considering the FI response or public comments on it. Why else would it agree details at that stage?
60. This interaction and supposed agreement of the Planning Authority clearly gives rise to the perception of prejudgment bias and taints the entire process.
61. I ask the Planning Authority to address this in its decision since it is a matter that undermines the integrity of the process.

=== CONCLUSION ===
62. The application should be refused, if it is granted it will almost certainly be refused on appeal thereby impeding proposals that are appropriate for the site.
Yours sincerely, [signature] Fred Logue

=== ANNEX 1 — MCC ACKNOWLEDGEMENT (pages 12–13) ===
Local Government Ireland acknowledgement. Submission No.: 150000033388. Date of Issue: 28/08/2025 02:33pm. Planning Application Reference No: 2560781. "A submission/observation in writing, has been received from Fred Logue on 27/08/2025 in relation to the above planning application. The appropriate fee of €20 has been paid. (Fee not applicable to prescribed bodies)." Confirms Logue made an ORIGINAL observation on 27/08/2025 (this is the basis for "no fee due" on the current FI-stage observation). Irish-language duplicate follows on p13.

=== END OF SUBMISSION ===
NOTE ON DATE DISCREPANCY: Cover form and letter dated 13 July 2026 (current FI-stage observation). Annex 1 acknowledgement is for the ORIGINAL observation dated 27/08/2025. Both relate to the same PA Ref 2560781.
